<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>4,013,711 now employed in all the 53 branches of different industries, including the State Ordnance Works, and 241,530 workers engaged in the construction and maintenance of railways, their aggregate production reaching the value of £1,041,037,000, and the net output being £406,799,000. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Shabble of a Duke” is an expression coined by Carlyle; it is a somewhat free rendering of Kropotkin’s “<i xml:lang="fr">Monsieur le Vicomte</i>,” but I think it expresses his meaning. <cite>—⁠<abbr class="eoc">Trans.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The municipal debt of Paris amounted in 1904 to 2,266,579,100 francs, and the charges for it were 121,000,000 francs. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No fallacy more harmful has ever been spread than the fallacy of a “One-day Revolution,” which is propagated in superficial Socialist pamphlets speaking of the Revolution of the 18th of March at Berlin, supposed (which is absolutely wrong) to have given Prussia its representative Government. We saw well the harm made by such fallacies in Russia in 1905⁠–⁠1907. The truth is that up to 1871 Prussia, like Russia of the present day, had a scrap of paper which could be described as a “Constitution,” but it had no representative Government. The Ministry imposed upon the nation, up till 1870, the budget it chose to propose. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The decree of the 30 March: by this decree rents due up to the terms of October, 1870, and January and April, 1871, were annulled. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>They <em>have</em> already been discovered since the above lines were written. <a href="chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We know this from Playfair, who mentioned it at Joule’s death. <a href="chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It seems that the Communists of Young Icaria had understood the importance of a free choice in their daily relations apart from work. The ideal of religious Communists has always been to have meals in common; it is by meals in common that early Christians manifested their adhesion to Christianity. Communion is still a vestige of it. Young Icarians had given up this religious tradition. They dined in a common dining room, but at small separate tables, at which they sat according to the attractions of the moment. The Communists of Anama have each their house and dine at home, while taking their provisions at will at the communal stores. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kropotkin: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">In Russian and French Prisons</i>. London, 1887. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A fuller development of these ideas will be found in my book, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fields, Factories, and Workshops</i>, published by <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Thomas Nelson and Sons in their popular series in 1912. <a href="chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A new enlarged edition of it has been published by Thomas Nelson and Sons in their “Shilling Library.” <a href="chapter-17.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Consult <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La Répartition métrique des impôts</i>, by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Toubeau, two <abbr>vols.</abbr>, published by Guillaumin in 1880. (We do not in the least agree with Toubeau’s conclusions, but it is a real encyclopaedia, indicating the sources which prove what can be obtained from the soil.) <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La Culture maraîchere</i>, by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Ponce, Paris, 1869. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Potager Gressent</i>, Paris, 1885, an excellent practical work. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Physiologie et culture du blé</i>, by Risler, Paris, 1881. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le blé, sa culture intensive et extensive</i>, by Lecouteux, Paris, 1883. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La Cité Chinoise</i>, by Eugène Simon. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le dictionnaire d’agriculture</i>, by Barral (Hachette, editor). <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Rothamstead Experiments</i>, by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Wm.</abbr> Fream, London, 1888⁠—culture without manure, <abbr>etc.</abbr> (the “Field” office, editor). <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fields, Factories, and Workshops</i>, by the author. (Thomas Nelson &amp; Sons.) <a href="chapter-17.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Summing up the figures given on agriculture, figures proving that the inhabitants of the two departments of Seine and Seine-et-Oise can live perfectly well on their own territory by employing very little time annually to obtain food, we have:⁠—</p>
					<table>
						<caption>Departments of Seine and Seine-et-Oise</caption>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td>Number of inhabitants in 1889</td>
								<td>3,900,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Area in acres</td>
								<td>1,507,300</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Average number of inhabitants per acre</td>
								<td>2.6</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<th colspan="2" scope="rowgroup">Areas to be cultivated to feed the inhabitants (in acres):⁠—</th>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Corn and Cereals</td>
								<td>494,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Natural and artificial meadows</td>
								<td>494,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Vegetables and fruit</td>
								<td>from 17,300 to 25,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Leaving a balance for houses, roads, parks, forests</td>
								<td>494,000</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<th colspan="2" scope="rowgroup">Quantity of annual work necessary to improve and cultivate the above surfaces in five-hour workdays:⁠—</th>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Cereals (culture and crop)</td>
								<td>15,000,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Meadows, milk, rearing of cattle</td>
								<td>10,000,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Market-gardening culture, high-class fruit</td>
								<td>33,000,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Extras</td>
								<td>12,000,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Total</td>
								<td>70,000,000</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
					<p>If we suppose that only half of the able-bodied adults (men and women) are willing to work at agriculture, we see that 70,000,000 workdays must be divided among 1,200,000 individuals, which gives us 58 workdays of 5 hours for each of these workers. With that the population of the two departments would have all necessary bread, meat, milk, vegetables, and fruit, both for ordinary and even luxurious consumption. Today a workman spends for the necessary food of his family (generally less than what is necessary) at least one-third of his 300 workdays a year, about 1,000 hours be it, instead of 290. That is, he thus gives about 700 hours too much to fatten the idle and the would-be administrators, because he does not produce his own food, but buys it of middlemen, who in their turn buy it of peasants who exhaust themselves by working with bad tools, because, being robbed by the landowners and the State, they cannot procure better ones. <a href="chapter-17.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
